there were two schools of thought and
two only about politics one is that lack
of life experience makes people bad at
politics and the other is that life
experience itself makes people bad at
politics which do you think is worse
sitting down and trying to come up with
pragmatic solutions for climate change
with a bunch of teenagers who really
have no life experience yet or sitting
down with 55 year old career computer
programmers trying to talk politics with
guys who've spent their whole lives
working computer programming very
frustrating very counterproductive
what's going on in terms of the
translation of climate science into
political action it's partly so tragic
and counterproductive because climate
scientists have a lot more in common
with computer programmers than they have
in common with political philosophers or
to be blunt people like myself who spent
their whole lives obsessing over
political philosophy political history
the organization of social movements the
way Parliament's and governments work so
on and so forth we have the ultimate
situation in which those who have the
technical expertise to inform public
policy are themselves the least able the
least eloquent to do so they are even
less eloquent than 16 year-old Greta
tunberg who obviously is speaking with
no life experience with no technical
knowledge so on and so forth I'd like to
start these videos by dealing with a
very palpable tangible real-world
example instead of abstract reasoning
when you open a can of carbonated water
fizzy water
if you sip it
it tastes different from flat water from
water that came out of a bottle that
never was carbonated set the two bottles
to one side and wait while all of the
bubbles disappear taste them both again
they still taste it it's not just the
bubbles it's not just the carbonation
carbonated water is made more acidic
through the process of carbonation
through exposure to carbon even after
the water has settled down even after
the bubbles have left and evaporated the
same thing happens to the oceans acid
oceans or ocean acidification is one of
the least discussed aspects of climate
change today it's one of the most
durable and insoluble and the reason why
people aren't talking about it is
because it's not easily manufactured
into a civilization threatening crisis
if humanity now sits by and does nothing
and allows the oceans to become more and
more acidic it will wipe out all of the
coral reefs on planet earth that'll be
the first thing to disappear it'll wipe
out almost all of the large fish species
as I understand it jellyfish will do ok
tiny single-cell organisms will be ok
there will be kind of winners and losers
but marine life as we know it will cease
to exist
human civilization will be fine nobody
will eat lobster ever again but human
civilization can continue just fine
without anyone eating lobster that
presents a tragedy that's much closer to
what the climate change crisis really
confronts us with than what people at
grete tunberg people like extinction
rebellion are talking about there's an
attempt to manufacture or misrepresent
the nature of the threat so that
humanity itself will
cease to exist will be decimated so that
civilized society will cease to exist to
even pose the notion that democracy will
cease to exist and we replace by fascism
I've heard extinction rebellions say
that again and again and I think Greta
is influenced by their verbiage to some
extent um I recently heard interview by
a mainstream news source I'm going to
choose not to say who and they said oh
well you know rising ocean levels so you
know this is the idea that the actual
location of the ocean will change and
certain cities and inhabited areas now
will become submergent or rising ocean
levels will entail so many trillions of
dollars of damage a certain percentage
loss in GDP global it's on the the other
person being interviewed here said oh
well here's the footnote on those
projections it's true that if you just
take a map of the world and color in the
coastlines blue to represent the ocean
coming in and then you calculate the
damage you get these astronomical
figures um however if you actually try
to simulate the gradual series of stages
whereby people would relocate whole
cities might be abandoned sure but still
happens gradually enough um new
infrastructure gets built you know new
types of crops are planted to replace
old crops that don't exist when you
compensate for the different types of
infrastructure that can be built to help
civilized countries cope with it so
everyone put it will then the numbers
are suddenly dramatically lower we're
talking about a fraction of a percentage
of GDP being lost and so on and so forth
that really it no longer sounds good as
a stir goal and you could hear it in the
voice of the interviewer in response
there was like oh and I would say both
in terms of what he said and how he said
it I felt that his concern was if he
took this news and broadcast it he was
eroding or undermining the rationale for
sudden dramatic
action in response to this as an
emergency I used to live in Bangkok
Thailand again I'm trying to keep these
tangible palpable examples I worked in
museums when I was there so historical
research from museums and you know one
day I was down at the the construction
site where one of the museum's was gonna
be built and you know he saw one of
these machines digging into the earth
scooping the earth and just when it was
a few millimeters below ground level
there was water you know this is semi
saline ocean water mixing with river
water you know in pain you know and I
suddenly realize it's as if we're all
standing on a lily pad this part of the
city at least is a very very small
distance above sea level
and from that moment on I started joking
with the other people involved in the
planning and development this museum
look guys we've got to be planning to
make the world's greatest underwater art
museum world's greatest submersibles
rooms yet this is all gonna be
underwater just a few decades okay it is
true the odds that downtown Bangkok
would be abandoned pretty solid
they're pretty good odds that Bangkok
has a specific examples of City I know
and there may be all kinds of
sentimental reasons why that would be a
crushing blow to the culture and history
of talent but let me ask you something
do you actually think the statues the
works of art that are in the National
Museum in Bangkok would be destroyed or
do you think that as temperatures rise
in ocean levels live right there would
be an organized response to that threat
that the city would be evacuated that
cultural heritage would be removed and
relocated elsewhere that in fact it
wouldn't be the end of life as we know
it it would just be a reorganization of
that's
a few million people would move to the
Northeast a few million moved to the
northwest so on and so forth but it
wouldn't be the type of crisis the type
of threat that's being now manufactured
and presented to the mainstream press so
the problem with the sky is falling
narrative with the crisis narrative of
the threat of global warming the
civilization ending humanity and
ignorant it is twofold one it's gonna
lead to people doing the wrong things
but two this is the one that interests
me more it's going to read lead to
people doing the right things for the
wrong reasons okay our motivations
matter all right
what are we gonna do about the tragedy
of ocean acidification there's a sense
in which it doesn't touch us but it's
our moral responsibility wiping out the
vast majority of ocean life it's a
terrible thing it's a terrible stain on
the the moral record of humanity however
you want to think of it okay but to try
to present the reason for that being
self-preservation it's not
self-preservation it's not defense it's
not for us that we do it at some point
we have to start making decisions
morally we have to resolve ethically to
do the right thing simply because it is
the right thing to do okay to see that
as being in our self-interest even
though it is in all honesty not
self-serving in a mention right now two
of the open secrets of the climate
change crisis two of the solutions that
are staring us in the face and for which
all the science has been done it's known
they can be deployed okay one is very
simply cold misting misting technology
doesn't say on that scientifically
complicated cause it's not
and the second or reflective arrays of
satellites okay very briefly misting the
the fantasy form of this technology is
to have boats skimming around on lakes
and oceans and ideally there are solar
powered boats but it can be done with a
smokestack and a factory if you produce
white puffy clouds of mist of almost any
kind it can be water vapor but it could
be a form of carefully intentionally
manufacturing industrial smoke white
puffy clouds reflect the sun's rays way
pup puffy clouds do cause local and
global cooling and it's entirely within
our means to start generating in this
sense mist or cloud cover yeah the
numbers have been crunched on it a
completely cynical solution number two
deploying satellites that will reflect
the sun's rays away from the surface of
the earth this would be most effective
if you had satellites along the edge of
the Arctic ice mass and in South Africa
along the edge of the Antarctic ice mass
I've talked about this with to face to
face two engineers in that line at work
guys who work on things related to
rockets and satellites about you and I
remember both conversations at first
they were they were kind of excited that
oh well that would be tremendously
complicated and I said no you know
what's complicated having one satellite
capable of launching a missile that will
hit another satellite that's complicated
and we can do that when you're talking
about just putting a satellite in orbit
and then having it basically unfold
aluminum foil that's incredibly simple
and it's already been done it's way it's
not just past the experimental phase I
know about experiments done by the
Russians and they come up politically
because whether weaponization is illegal
under
international treaties but they've done
much more sophisticated things than just
cooling through satellites so satellites
in near-earth orbit it can be done and
it's cheap and then basically the amount
of solar radiation coming in is like a
faucet you can turn it off and on with
these two technologies all right
there's a list of other solutions to
start knocking off huge percentages of
the problem and each of those solutions
comes with a different kind of cost here
in Taiwan I live on the island of Taiwan
if you couldn't guess from the
background of the video the government
just committed to build a new train line
that will be approximately 20 kilometres
approximately 13 miles and that new
train line is very short there's one
extra stop on an existing training that
new stop on the train will cost two
billion US dollars two billion for
countries like the United States of
America and Canada to radically reduce
the reliance on automobiles through
building railroad networks world-class
21st century where Rodin works trillions
trillions of dollars and Taiwan is a
very fundamental advantage there that
train line they're building they're
building it in an economic context
that's unbelievably vital to ask a
question about Canada this will be easy
for you guys to imagine even if you've
never been to Canada what why isn't
there a high-speed rail linking
Saskatoon to Regina
Saskatoon in the city in northern
Saskatchewan to Regina the capital why
not it seems like the most obvious and
Noble thing it's because nobody nobody
in Canada is really confident that the
City of Saskatoon has an economic future
nobody really believes nobody's cautious
about Regina
either no one's really sure that this
see is gonna matter 50 years from now
into the future so we don't want to
spend two billion dollars we don't want
to spend twenty billion dollars building
a railroad that may lead from somewhere
to nowhere or from nowhere to nowhere
and here in Taiwan nobody doubts that
the economy of Gaussian is going to be
booming ten years from now 20 years from
now 50 years from now
gives them a very very unusual sort of
certainty in the future when investing
billions of dollars in that kind of
infrastructure okay what will make a
dramatic difference in transportation is
not replacing one type of car with
another slightly more efficient car do
the math even if you replace a court
model Gaskins human car with an
idealized electrical car so an
incredibly expensive car such as is made
by Tesla for one thing the difference in
efficiency it's it's much narrower than
you'd like to imagine it is electrical
car is still need electricity
electricity comes from power plants the
power plant may be built burning coal
coal and the power plant may be burning
oil the electrical cars we have in the
road now they weigh 500 pounds more than
a gas car they have that weight all the
time the gas car is lighter and it gets
even lighter and lighter as the gas tank
gets closer to empty the differences in
real-world efficiency are not so
inspirational but moreover you can't
just calculate how much pollution is
generated by driving the car or 100
kilometers you have to do full
life-cycle calculations and what you
find is that there is no car in the
world so efficient that the savings in
pollution I say here pollution not just
carbon emissions but in all pollution
that the savings in pollution will
compensate for the damage you're doing
by manufacturing a new car and throwing
another new car an old car in the
landfill when you do the math the most
ecological thing you can do is to keep
the old car
we already have on the road to keep
repairing them for 50 years and to not
replace them at all because it's such a
polluting process to destroy one car and
manufacture another okay depressing but
here's the good news
it's not a small difference in
efficiency when you switch from car
to bus when you switch from car to train
okay that's a radical exponential gain
in efficiency but for countries like the
United States of America and Canada
that's exactly what they're least able
to do the city of Detroit is not able to
transform itself to resemble a city in
the South of France and it's tragic but
they're now burdened with a legacy of
several centuries of unbelievably
terrible urban planning and
infrastructure development the other
issue with costs is that building
infrastructure like trains to really get
it to work with a city but whether it's
Detroit or Saskatoon or anywhere else
it's normally going to involve
demolishing and rebuilding large parts
of the city because you can't have the
train just land know where it needs to
land in a city that works as a
pedestrian city in terms of other forms
of transportation in terms of the whole
way that shopping and housing and
education other institutions work it's
never enough to just build a new train
line and by the same token it's never
enough to just add a few more buses so
that's a kind of fundamental social
reform that even with an unlimited
budget the countries that really matter
are almost powerless to make so breaking
our dependence on the car on the
automobile is something we can do and it
doesn't require a new technology it
could be done entirely with the
technology of the bus and the Train over
a hundred years old but are we going to
do it
are we motivated to do it just because
it's the right thing to do or do you
think people are going to do it because
of hysterical pseudo-scientific claims
being advanced by credit
berg and extension rebellion other would
be edgy radicals screaming in the
streets that all of humanity is going to
be wiped out if we don't screaming in
the street that civilization will end
with a two degrees two degrees
centigrade change in our climate
I don't think political change is very
often motivated by fear I think it tends
to be motivated by a very clear positive
vision of what's possible and what's
practicable and more often than not it's
motivated by a sense of dignity of honor
of doing what's morally right not just
what's economically expedient not just
what's in your self-interest or what's
necessary for self-defense or
what-have-you
so I think there's a challenge here and
the type of people who work in climate
science are very poorly suited to it
just as computer programmers are very
poorly suited to it there's a tremendous
challenge here in developing and
articulating a new political philosophy
for the 21st century and it's probably
not going to be the same philosophy in
the South of France and in northern
Canada and elsewhere so I've already
said in this discussion that it doesn't
just matter that we do the right thing
but it also matters that we do the right
thing for the right reasons and that's
what I think makes veganism such a
tremendously profoundly important
example people have many times debated
with me or challenged me would I prefer
to have a world with a hundred million
vegans but who are not ethical vegans
people who become vegans for health
reasons or maybe they only need a
reduced Aryan diet or pescetarian diet
or would I rather have a world where
there are only three million vegans but
they're all perfectly ethically pure and
well noted people have people who
confronted with this all the time
and their point is they feel we better
to live in a world with a larger number
of highly imperfect flawed poorly
motivated semi vegans
rather than having organizations staffed
by idealized ethical vegans veganism
isn't just important as a diet okay
veganism isn't just important for your
health and it isn't just important for
the impact that has on the animals and
it isn't just important for the impact
it has on the environment veganism is
also important for its potential to
instigate cultural change veganism is
important for the discipline we take
upon ourselves and the ways in which we
start disciplining our society educating
our society were forming our democracy
in that spirit okay I don't see veganism
as the final endpoint of social
evolution I see it as a spark as a very
delicate very weak spark and at the
moment it doesn't even exist as a
movement that instigates people to
change not just individually but to
change at a level of social organization
the problem is if you build the world's
greatest railroad which is what they're
doing here in Taiwan if you build a two
billion dollar railroad that only goes
13 miles fat it's great quality fabulous
Claudie railroad okay people will get on
and get off with absolutely no thought
about the harm they're doing to the
world in all the other things in their
life whether that's eating pork every
day or burning charcoal briquets in
their backyard or whatever it may be
okay there's no sense of participation
in that there's no sense of personal
responsibility there's no self
discipline there's no education
privately and personally nor in reaching
out and doing public education for
others okay
the government builds a railroad and the
rest of us we just come along for the
ride
veganism is of such unique importance
not just because of the statistics and
the statistics are true
important 70% less land-use dramatically
less carbon dioxide emitted most people
say about 50% reduction you know mission
amazing spectacular numbers land water
air pollution enormous a positive way
okay veganism is important because it's
something you can do it's something I
can do it's something we can do and it's
not just that you can't do anything
about building a railroad but that even
if the government does start building
new railroads because they're concerned
about climate change they do that on
your behalf and the culture remains
unchanged
what veganism leads to ultimately is a
regeneration of democracy a
transformation of our culture and it's a
transformation that proceeds from
personal ethical commitment a new sense
of dignity a new sense of honor a new
sense of obligation it's possible that a
hundred years from now all the great
cities of the world will have built
fabulous new train systems new electric
trains better public transportation it's
possible that a hundred years from now
governments around the world will have
replaced coal burning power plants with
solar and wind power it's possible but
the problem is if the people don't care
if they don't care personally if they
don't connect with something like
veganism and take on a new sense of
responsibility then every fish in the
ocean every whale in the ocean every
lobster will go extinct as the oceans
acidified right if we don't start
creating a culture of personal
responsibility take responsibility for
the whole planet including its animals
then all we'll get is a gray soulless
technocratic solution to what is
ultimately a merely scientific problem
that's why I'm concerned not just about
doing the right thing because it's the
right thing to do but also doing it for
the right